N°10 I M A Y 2 0 2 3 Newsletter Version Française

ARTICLE 61(10) OF REGULATION (EU) 2017/745: INSTRUCTIONS FOR USE AND FAQ

According to Article 2(44) of the Medical Devices Regulation (EU)
2017/745 (MDR), clinical evaluation is defined as a \"systematic and
planned process to generate, collect, analyze and evaluate clinical data
relating to a device on an ongoing basis in order to verify the safety
and performance, including clinical benefits, of the device when used in
accordance with the manufacturer\'s intended purpose.\" Clinical
evaluation is therefore the analysis of clinical data required to
demonstrate compliance with the General Safety and Performance
Requirements (GSPR) of Annex I. However, in some cases, the use of
clinical data may not be appropriate to demonstrate compliance with
these general safety and performance requirements: the clinical
evaluation may then be based on the Article 61(10) route. In what cases
can Article 61(10) be used? What is the rationale for using this pathway
to demonstrate compliance? How do you conduct a clinical evaluation
using the Article 61(10) pathway? The purpose of this newsletter is to
answer these questions in order to help you better understand the
expectations of Notified Bodies (NBs) in the context of the Article
61(10) clinical evaluation.

pliance based on clinical data is considered inappropriate. In A WHAT
DOES ARTICLE 61(10) MEAN? other words, recourse to Article 61(10) is
possible when the DECODING performance and safety of the device can be
demonstrated by non-clinical data and there are no relevant or
meaningful mea- surable clinical criteria. Article 61(10) begins with
\"Without prejudice to paragraph 4\". Far from being a detail, this
introduction means that implant- This is the case for a device that does
not provide a direct able and Class III devices are not eligible for
clinical evaluation measurable clinical benefit, such as a medical
device accessory, under the Article 61(10) route. without its own
clinical claim or direct influence on the clinical performance of the
device with which it is intended to be used. For other devices, Article
61(10) is potentially applicable \"where compliance with the general
safety and performance require- In this case, an \"appropriate
justification\" must be provided ex- ments is considered not to have
been satisfactorily demon- plaining why the manufacturer \"considers
adequate a demon- strated by clinical data\", i.e., where demonstration
of com- stration of compliance with general safety and performance

THIS NEWSLETTER IS FOR INFORMATION ONLY AND DOESN\'T CONSTITUTE 1 A
NORMATIVE OR REGULATORY EVIDENCE. N°10 I M A Y 2 0 2 3 Newsletter
requirements that is based solely on the results of non-clinical
applied. This does not mean, however, that devices evalu- test methods,
such as performance evaluation, bench testing, ated under Article 61(10)
have no clinical benefit: most of and pre-clinical evaluation.\" those
devices have an indirect clinical benefit derived from their technical
performance. The fact that the indirect clinical The justification for
the use of Article 61(10) is therefore a benefit is not measurable by
clinical data is part of the regulatory requirement. justification for
the reliance upon Article 61(10). In this case, it is therefore
acceptable for this indirect clinical benefit to be demonstrated by
non-clinical data.

B HOW TO JUSTIFY THE USE OF ARTICLE Other parameters to be considered
for the justification of the 61(10)? choice of track 61(10) are:

• The degree of novelty of the device: Devices eligible for According to
the MDR, manufacturers who wish to opt for the pathway 61(10) generally
have a low degree of novelty. Article 61(10) pathway must provide a
detailed justification for this Otherwise, there would be little data
available on similar de- choice, based on the following: vices, and the
clinical effects of this type of device would not be well documented in
the scientific literature. This would call • Risk management: For
potentially eligible devices, risk man- into question the choice of
Article 61(10). agement plays a major role in justifying the reliance
upon Article 61(10). If the risk assessment indicates that there are •
Appropriateness and/or feasibility of a clinical investiga- relatively
high residual risks, this calls into question the 61(10) tion: For some
types of devices, clinical investigations may pathway as additional
clinical data may be required. The not be feasible, ethical, or
relevant. In such cases, it may be elements of risk management should be
sufficiently detailed more appropriate to use non-clinical tests to
demonstrate in the clinical evaluation report to determine whether these
the safety and performance of the device. This should be part elements
support the use of non-clinical test methods. Recall of the
justification for relying upon Article 61(10). that the Clinical
Evaluation Report (CER) is intended to be a . self-supporting document
and therefore a simple reference to the risk management report is
insufficient. Potential de- vice-related harm must therefore be
described, the hazards C DOES THIS MEAN THAT THERE IS and hazardous
situations that caused it must be listed, and NO CLINICAL DATA IN THE
CLINICAL it must be demonstrated that the non-clinical test methods
ASSESSMENT REPORT? are appropriate considering the identified risks.

• Detailed data on the interaction between the device and No. The fact
that clinical data is not considered appropriate to the human body: Most
devices for which Article 61(10) is demonstrate the safety and
performance of the device does applicable do not have a direct
interaction with the human not mean that such data (if it exists) should
be excluded. body. However, Article 61(10) may also be applicable for
Article 61(10) allows for the demonstration of compliance with some
devices that have a direct interaction with the human the GSPR without
clinical data. However, in accordance with body, for example for basic
surgical instruments such as scis- Annex III of the MDR, a review of the
scientific literature must sors or forceps. On the other hand, if it is
a specific surgical always be conducted to identify risks or data that
is not known instrument that is essential to the success of the surgical
pro- to the manufacturer. cedure and the clinical performance of the
implant, the 61(10) pathway is not applicable. In addition, legacy
devices will have post-market surveillance Elements to consider here are
the duration of contact with data that will be required to be provided
in the clinical evalua- the human body, the type of contact and mode of
action, and tion report (see MDCG 2020-6). the type of tissue in contact
with the device. If the interaction between the device and the human
body has novel charac- teristics (different from those described in the
current state of the art for this type of device), additional clinical
data may D IS ARTICLE 61(10) APPLICABLE TO be required. A DEVICE FOR
WHICH THERE IS INSUFFICIENT CLINICAL DATA? • Expected clinical
performance and manufacturer\'s claims: In general, performance and
safety claims are purely technical in a clinical evaluation according to
Article 61(10). If No. Article 61(10) is not a pathway for evaluating
devices for the manufacturer claims a clinical performance, clinical
data which there is a lack of clinical data, but a pathway for
evaluating is required to demonstrate this, and Article 61(10) cannot be
devices for which the clinical data is deemed inappropriate or

THIS NEWSLETTER IS FOR INFORMATION ONLY AND DOESN\'T CONSTITUTE 2 A
NORMATIVE OR REGULATORY EVIDENCE. N°10 I M A Y 2 0 2 3 Newsletter
irrelevant. If there are appropriate clinical endpoints to assess For
legacy devices, post-market surviellance data held by the the safety,
performance, and benefit of the device, and there is manufacturer should
be provided. insufficient clinical data available on the device (or
equivalent devices), then a clinical investigation is required. Finally,
an analysis of the available data should be presented, with a clear
indication of how each performance and safety This also means that if
there are similar (not necessarily equiv- claim is supported by these
data. alent) devices for which relevant clinical data are available, the
reliance upon Article 61(10) should be questioned, as this sug- gests
that it is indeed possible to obtain relevant clinical data for such
devices. F IF A DEVICE PREVIOUSLY COMPLIED WITH ANNEX X §1.1D OF
DIRECTIVE 93/42/EEC, IS IT AUTOMATICALLY ELIGIBLE FOR ARTICLE 61(10)? E
WHAT SHOULD THE CLINICAL EVALUATION REPORT INCLUDE IF THERE IS NO
CLINICAL DATA? Not systematically. The wording of Annex X 1.1.(d) is
very simi- lar to Article 61(10) but the regulatory requirements for
clinical evaluation are not identical under the Directive and the MDR.
It Even if a demonstration of compliance with the GSPRs without is
possible that a legacy device for which this pathway has been clinical
data is conducted, a clinical evaluation report must be used to
demonstrate compliance under the Directive may not written and the
report must be evaluated by the Notified Body. be eligible for the
Article 61(10) pathway. But which information should be included in a
clinical evaluation report in the absence of clinical data?

As noted above, a detailed rationale must be provided to sup- G HOW TO
ORGANIZE POST-MARKET port the reliance upon Article 61(10). CLINICAL
FOLLOW-UP? In the case of a legacy device, a search of the scientific
literature on the device in question must be conducted. This A
post-marketing surveillance (PMS) plan is systematically re- search must
be done on the one hand to show that there is no quired for devices for
which Article 61(10) is applicable. But what clinical data available
(which is part of the justification for the about post-market clinical
follow-up (PMCF)? If clinical data are use of Article 61(10)) and on the
other hand to identify possible not considered relevant to demonstrate
compliance with the clinical data of which the manufacturer was not
aware. It must pre-market GSPRs, does this mean that no post-market
clinical be documented in the clinical evaluation report. follow-up is
required?

In all cases, a literature review should be performed to deter- The
applicability of Article 61(10) does not constitute an mine the state of
the art in medicine in the field, alternatives exemption from the PMCF
obligations. As shown in Annex to the device under evaluation, and
available data on similar XIV Part B of the MDR, the concept of PMCF
includes specific devices. methods (including post-market clinical
studies) and general methods, including for example user feedback on the
device A summary of the non-clinical data should then be presented, and
review of the scientific literature. including: Where the Article 61(10)
pathway has been used for the clinical • Demonstration of compliance
with harmonized standards evaluation of the device, it is unlikely that
a post-market clini- through non-clinical evidence, such as mechanical
testing, cal investigation is feasible. This investigation would
otherwise evidence of biocompatibility, usability testing, etc. It is
ac- have been feasible and even necessary before the device was ceptable
to summarize test results and refer to test reports placed on the
market. However, general post-market follow-up for detailed results.
methods can and should be applied. For example, a literature • Where
applicable, the results of pre-clinical testing on an- review will
determine whether the device still corresponds to the imals, phantoms,
or cadavers, ideally involving healthcare state of the art in the
medical field in question. Feedback from professionals or other end
users. These are not clinical data users of the device may identify new
risks or more accurately but can be used to demonstrate compliance with
GSPRs, estimate the frequency of known risks. particularly in terms of
usability. Therefore, a PMCF plan should be written and incorporated
into the post-market surveillance plan. Vigilance database search
results for the legacy device and similar devices should be included.
The search strategy and If post-market clinical follow-up is not deemed
necessary, this databases used should be described. should be justified
and duly argued in the PMS plan.

THIS NEWSLETTER IS FOR INFORMATION ONLY AND DOESN\'T CONSTITUTE 2 3 A
NORMATIVE OR REGULATORY EVIDENCE. N°10 I M A Y 2 0 2 3 Newsletter
Conclusion The choice of the 61(10) pathway requires a detailed
justification as to why a demonstration of compliance with the GSPR
based exclusively on non-clinical data is relevant and sufficient. Those
non-clinical data should then be summarized in the clinical evaluation
report. For legacy devices, it is essential to include all available
data on the device, including post- market surveillance data.

Article 61(10) is therefore not a derogation clause allowing the need
for clinical data to be waived, but a possible evaluation pathway for
certain devices, generally low-risk and with a low degree of novelty,
for which an evaluation based on clinical data is deemed inappropriate
or irrelevant.

To go further TRAININGS FOR AMERICA REGION GUIDE

The Clinical Evaluation Report (CER) Requirements Medical Devices
Clinical Evaluation -- Summary of under the EU MDR 2017/745 Safety and
Clinical Performance (SSCP) -- 8-hour training session \| June 19-20 \|
October 30-31 \| Regulation (EU) 2017/745 Virtual classroom C  HECK OUT
THE PROGRAM It is the manufacturer's responsibility to specify and
justify the level of clinical evidence necessary to demonstrate
conformity with the relevant general safety and Post Market Surveillance
and Vigilance New Requirements performance requirements under under the
European Medical Device Regulations Regulation (EU) 2017/745. 8-hour
training session \| June 28 \| November 1-2 \| Virtual classroom This
guide recalls the principles of clinical evaluation and describes the C 
HECK OUT THE PROGRAM different elements to be included in: • The
clinical evaluation plan TRAININGS FOR OTHER REGIONS • The clinical
evaluation report • The post-market surveillance plan Understand the
regulatory requirements for clinical including the post-market clinical
evaluation to choose the right route follow-up (PMCF) plan SA65 \| 1-day
training session \| On demand • The PMCF evaluation report

Conduct clinical evaluation of medical devices using the All these
documents are part of the technical documentation, within literature
route the framework of CE marking procedures for medical devices, SA09
\| 1-day training session \| On demand regardless of the medical device
class.

Apply the requirements of the European Regulation 2017/745 L EARN MORE
on medical devices SA56 \| 2-day training session \| On demand C  ONTACT
GMED TRAINING CENTER © ByMoka • Photo : Canva

Newsletter Do not miss the latest updates of the Medical Device Industry
Subscribe

HEADQUARTER FRENCH REGIONAL OFFICE NORTH AMERICAN SUBSIDIARY

GMED SAS GMED SAS GMED NORTH AMERICA, INC 1 rue Gaston Boissier 19 D rue
de la Télématique 6550 Rock Spring Drive - Suite \# 280 75015 PARIS •
FRANCE 42000 SAINT-ETIENNE • FRANCE BETHESDA, MD 20817 • USA +33 (0)1 40
43 37 00 +33 (0)4 77 10 11 11 +1 (301) 495 0477 info@lne-gmed.com
request@lne-gmed.com 
