N°12 I A U G U S T 2 0 2 3 Newsletter Version Française

CLINICAL EVALUATION: THE STRATEGIC PATH OF WELL ESTABLISHED TECHNOLOGIES
(WET) FOR LEGACY DEVICES

Demonstration of compliance with general safety and performance
requirements must be based on clinical data pro- viding sufficient
clinical evidence. The manufacturer must specify and justify the level
of clinical evidence required for the device under evaluation.

For legacy devices1, MDCG 2020-6 provides guidance to manufacturers on
the level of evidence required and accepted for these devices. This
guide introduces a strategic route for legacy devices based on a
well-known and stable tech- nology, referred to in the text as Well
Established Technologies (WET).

What is allowed when using this approach? When and how to apply it? What
are the pitfalls to avoid? GMED answers these questions in this latest
edition of its newsletter.

The MDCG 2020-6 guide states that a \"legacy device\" can only A WHAT IS
ALLOWED WHEN USING THIS be claimed as a WET in exceptional cases. Use of
this route ROUTE? TO WHICH DEVICES DOES IT should therefore be
considered with great care. APPLY? 1 Devices which, in accordance with
Article 120(3) of Regulation (EU) 2017/745 (RDM), are The route called
\"Well Established technologies for legacy placed on the market from the
date of entry into force of the regulation and until the dates devices\"
is only really addressed in the MDCG 2020-6 guide. referred to in
Article 120(3a) and (3b) of the RDM, if certain conditions are met. This
document highlights the provision related to paragraphs 1 These devices
can be: and 6.a of Article 61 of Regulation (EU) 2017/745, on sufficient
• Class I devices in accordance with Directive 93/42/EEC, for which an
EC declaration of confor- clinical data for \"legacy devices\". It paves
the way for the use mity was issued before May 26, 2021, and for which
the conformity assessment procedure of low-level evidence data for
so-called \"standard of care in accordance with the MDD requires the
intervention of a notified body, or; devices2\", otherwise known as
\"Well Established technologies • Devices covered by a valid CE
certificate (in accordance with article 120 paragraph 2 of the (WET)
legacy devices\". RDM) issued under Directive 90/385/EEC or 93/42/EEC
before May 26, 2021.

2 Treatment recognized by medical experts as appropriate for a certain
type of illness and widely used by healthcare professionals.

THIS NEWSLETTER IS FOR INFORMATION ONLY AND DOESN\'T CONSTITUTE 1 A
NORMATIVE OR REGULATORY EVIDENCE. N°12 I A U G U S T 2 0 2 3 Newsletter
This route is applicable to all device classes, even implantable
(BfArM), the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory and Class III
legacy devices, according to Appendix III of MDCG Agency (MHRA), and the
National Institute for Health and 2020-6: \"Class III legacy devices and
implantable legacy devices Care Excellence (NICE), for example, and
literature searches which are not well-established technologies should
have sufficient of scientific articles. This demonstration requires an
exhaus- clinical data as a minimum at level 4. Those devices which are
tive approach, the application of best practices, details of key
well-established technologies may be able to confirm conformity words
and their relevance, as well as the inclusion and exclu- with the
relevant GSPRs via an evaluation of cumulative evidence sion criteria
used. This applies both to similar devices in the from additional
sources as listed below. Reliance solely on com- generic group and to
devices under evaluation. It must also plaints and vigilance is not
sufficient.\" be demonstrated that the generic group safety is favorable
and known, and that the device under evaluation safety is This route is
to be distinguished from the notion of Well Estab- comparable to that of
the generic group. lished Technologies in the regulatory text. These
WETs listed in Regulation (EU) 2017/745, Article 61(6.b) consist of an
exhaus- • Demonstration that the device has known clinical per- tive
list of DMs exempted from the obligation to conduct clinical formance
and that its generic group corresponds to investigations. \"standard of
care devices\" with few changes in indica- tions and state of the art,
must be established based on Even if the semantics are the same, they
don\'t point to the state-of-the-art data available for similar devices.
It must be same concept, and this can be a source of confusion.
demonstrated that the device under evaluation is sufficiently close to
similar devices in the generic group to be able to use its data. This
should include performance data taken, for example, from evaluation
reports such as those drawn up B WHAT ARE THE CRITERIA FOR USING THE by
CNEDiMTS, NICE, etc. The device under evaluation must WET STRATEGIC
ROUTE ? also have the same indications as similar devices in the same
generic group, as well as the same user(s). Different indica- tions,
different target populations or different users will In order to declare
a legacy device as a WET according to the call into question whether the
device is a WET. MDCG 2020-6 guide and claim the use of low level of
evidence cumulative clinical data, it must be demonstrated that the
lega- • Lastly, it must be demonstrated that the device has signifi- cy
device meets the following four criteria cited in section 1.2 of cant
experience on the market, by showing the date of CE the guide: marking
of the device under evaluation and that of similar • A relatively
simple, common design, with minor evolutions; devices belonging to the
same generic group. CE marking • A generic group whose security is well
known and which has dates for different indications should be specified,
if appli- not been associated with security problems in the past; cable.
• Well-known clinical performance and that its generic group corresponds
to \"standard of care devices\" with little evolution All Member States
in which the device under evaluation and in indications and state of the
art; similar devices are made available must be considered. If the •
Significant market experience. coverage of the European market is
different and is reduced to 1 or 2 countries, this calls into question
the principle of \"Well GMED offers further explanations of these
criteria: Established Technology\". • A relatively simple, common
design, with minor evolu- tions, implies two aspects: For a device to
qualify as a "WET legacy device", the available  - A simple, familiar
design with commonly used materials; clinical data must cover the entire
lifetime of the device, for each  - Minor changes have been made to the
device since it was claimed indication. first marketed, but these do not
affect the way it functions. These two aspects will have to be
demonstrated both for the device under evaluation and for similar
products in the generic group identified within the state of the art.

• Demonstrating that the device belongs to a generic group whose safety
is well known and not associated with past safety problems must include,
as a minimum, the collection of data from the post-marketing
surveillance (PMS) process, from vigilance databases, guides, or
assessment reports from the French National Commission for the
Evaluation of Med- ical Devices and Health Technologies (CNEDiMTS), a
body of the French High Authority for Health (HAS), the MAUD database,
the Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices

THIS NEWSLETTER IS FOR INFORMATION ONLY AND DOESN\'T CONSTITUTE 2 A
NORMATIVE OR REGULATORY EVIDENCE. N°12 I A U G U S T 2 0 2 3 Newsletter
It is then possible to use low-level evidence clinical data, or even to
consider such data as clinical data, even though they are not C WHAT
CLINICAL DATA CAN BE USED formally recognized as such by the
regulations. This strategy WHEN THE DEVICE IS A \"WET LEGACY also
requires the accumulation of low-level evidence from dif- DEVICE\"?
ferent sources. These data are defined in the table in Appen- dix III of
the MDCG 2020-6 guide, and correspond to level 5 to 12 clinical data. It
should be noted that the accumulation of Once correspondence to the
criteria has been demonstrated vigilance and complaints data alone is
not sufficient: \"Those and the device has qualified as a \"WET legacy
device\", both devices which are well-established technologies may be
able to for the under evaluation device and for similar devices in the
confirm conformity with the relevant GSPRs via an evaluation generic
group, it is then possible to use this route. of cumulative evidence
from additional sources as listed below. Reliance solely on complaints
and vigilance is not sufficient.\"

Conclusion The \"WET legacy devices\" route is one of the strategic
routes available for collecting clinical data. However, it is only
appli- cable to legacy devices. The manufacturer can only use it if the
device under evaluation meets the "WET legacy device" criteria defined
in MDCG 2020-6. Understanding the framework and what it underlies will
avoid any free interpretation that would not be accepted by the notified
body.

Furthermore, this approach does not allow clinical demonstration to be
based solely on data from similar devices or on post-marketing data
(complaints, vigilance, sales volume, etc.). It is based on an
accumulation of low-level evidence from different sources, including PMS
data and clinical data relating to similar devices. Only in the case of
\"WET legacy devices\" can clinical data on similar devices be used to
demonstrate device compliance. ➧

See the next page to go further

THIS NEWSLETTER IS FOR INFORMATION ONLY AND DOESN\'T CONSTITUTE 2 3 A
NORMATIVE OR REGULATORY EVIDENCE. N°12 I A U G U S T 2 0 2 3 Newsletter
To go further TRAININGS FOR AMERICA REGION GUIDE

The Clinical Evaluation Report (CER) Requirements Medical Devices
Clinical Evaluation -- Summary of under the EU MDR 2017/745 Safety and
Clinical Performance (SSCP) -- 8-hour training session \| October 30-31
\| Virtual classroom Regulation (EU) 2017/745 CHECK OUT THE PROGRAM It
is the manufacturer's responsibility to specify and justify the level of
clinical evidence necessary to demonstrate conformity with Post Market
Surveillance and Vigilance - New Requirements the relevant general
safety and under the European Medical Device Regulations performance
requirements under 8-hour training session \| November 01-02 \| Virtual
classroom Regulation (EU) 2017/745. CHECK OUT THE PROGRAM This guide
recalls the principles of clinical evaluation and describes the European
Medical Devices Regulation (EU) 2017/745 different elements to be
included in: 2-day training session \| September 27-28, 2023 \| December
7-8, 2023 \| Virtual classroom • The clinical evaluation plan • The
clinical evaluation report CHECK OUT THE PROGRAM • The post-market
surveillance plan including the post-market clinical TRAININGS FOR OTHER
REGIONS follow-up (PMCF) plan • The PMCF evaluation report Understand
the regulatory requirements for clinical All these documents are part of
the technical documentation, within evaluation to choose the right route
the framework of CE marking procedures for medical devices, SA65 \|
1-day training session \| On demand regardless of the medical device
class. Conduct clinical evaluation of medical devices using the
literature route L EARN MORE SA09 \| 1-day training session \| On demand
Meet regulatory requirements for post-market surveillance and vigilance
SA45 \| 1-day training session \| On demand CONTACT GMED TRAINING CENTER

© ByMoka • Photo : iStock Newsletter Do not miss the latest updates of
the Medical Device Industry Subscribe

HEADQUARTERS FRENCH REGIONAL OFFICE NORTH AMERICAN SUBSIDIARY GMED SAS
GMED SAS GMED NORTH AMERICA, INC 1 rue Gaston Boissier 19 D rue de la
Télématique 2600 Tower Oaks Boulevard - Suite 500 75015 PARIS • FRANCE
42000 SAINT-ETIENNE • FRANCE ROCKVILLE, MD 20852 • USA +33 (0)1 40 43 37
00 +33 (0)4 77 10 11 11 +1 (301) 495 0477 info@lne-gmed.com
request@lne-gmed.com 
